Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, Ricardo Lops, and today I'm
joined by Doctor Eric Storm. He is associate professor
of history at Leiden University, and today we're talking
about his book, Nationalism, A World History. So, Doctor
Storm, welcome to the show. It's a pleasure to
everyone.
Well, thank you for having me.
So what motivated you to write a book on
the world history of nationalism?
So, first of all, because there was no such
book, so most uh studies on nationalism focus on
one country or maybe nationalism in Europe or in
Latin America uh or in Africa, but, and they
focus on what is specific for nationalism in these
uh uh areas and Uh, about 10 years ago,
um, my university started a new program, International studies
that studied all parts of the world, and we
also had students from all over the world. So,
I, uh, gave a course there on nationalism and,
well, I had no option but to give them.
The opportunity to write on all parts of the
world. So I got papers on nationalism in Africa,
in nat in Latin America, in Asia, and I
really became aware that there were many similarities and
parallels and, and so, um, I got triggered to,
to write a, a book that was so much
in need and, uh, um, yeah, that's about the
story.
And when would you say nationalism, uh, started? I
mean, when exactly? Because many people when they think
about nationalism, they tend to associate it start with
the perhaps 18th, 19th century with the rise of
uh nation states, but, uh, when would you put
its origins?
Yeah, um, well, I would put its origin, I,
I agree with, with most, uh, experts that nationalism
is a consequence of the rise of, of, of
modern society. So, um, so it's a modern phenomenon
that was only really Possible in, in the modern
era and I would argue that it arose in
the age of revolutions and, and this can possibly
best be illustrated with the French Revolution. So the
start of the French Revolution was when the traditional
estates general, which represented the estates and not the,
uh, the whole population, um. REBELLED against the king
and the king was sovereign by the grace of
God, so he in a sense received his power
from above. And then the third estate, which represented
90-70% of the population, they said we're not anymore.
Representing a rest category in front of the nobility
and the clergy, but we are the national assembly,
so we do represent the nation, and the nation
then consists of all citizens of France, so. Um,
NATIONALISM arose not as a defining the nation as
a cultural or ethnic group, but simply as all
legal inhabitants of the kingdom of France. So regardless
of people spoke Breton or Catalan or Flemish, or
French, um, all inhabitants and even religious minorities like
the Protestants and the Jews received French citizenship. So
the nation was defined in, in terms of the
community of citizens and the nation was proclaimed sovereign.
So that also meant that The laws should apply
to all in the same way, so a constitution
was needed, elections were needed, a national parliament was
needed. So, uh, nationalism arose, uh, as, uh, also
as a constitutional democracy or at least a parliamentary
system. Um, SO that is where I see the
origins of, of nationalism.
But do you think that there were any precursors
to nationalism and nation states in medieval Europe and
the early modern age or not?
Um. Well, there are instances in which uh the
people rallied behind their king, uh, that, that there
was uh hostility to foreigners. So, um, what we
now, nowadays associate with nationalism, there are a lot
of phenomenon that, that occurred before as well, um.
But in general, um, what happened before the, the
age of revolution was, was very different, so people
still generally believe that power was conferred by God
to the monarch and that you had to abide,
uh, the monarch. If not, you were going against
God's will and so, um, Um, The The way
things functioned was, was fundamentally different and so identities
also were not so much national as they were
primarily local or maybe regional, but more important than
territorial identities were religious identities. So your identity was
primarily, are you a Christian, a Jew, a Muslim,
or a Hindu. And um uh and then your
legal position was determined by your The estate to
which you belong, so legal rules were different for
members of the nobility, for members of the clergy,
for the burghersers of cities, for members of the
guilds, for free farmers or for serfs or slaves.
So each group had its own specific rules, so
there was no So the rules that apply to
you depended on, on your social status and not
on uh your, your territorial belongings. So it, it
also, these territorial belongings also were vague and not
very relevant in everyday life.
OK, so, uh, you talk about the age of
revolutions and the invention of the nation state as
you put in the book in the US and
France. Has nationalism then spread from the West to
the West? Is that how it worked?
Um, Yeah, so it was, so it was invented
in, in Europe and, and maybe also accidentally in,
in uh the Americas in the United States, uh,
but it became But it became a very influential
and attractive model. So it was an attractive model
for educated middle classes around the world because they
also wanted legal equality. They also wanted uh citizenship.
They also wanted uh political participation. So this, this
nation-state model that, that, uh, arose in France really
was very influential around the world. So even in
parts of Africa and Asia, uh, already, uh, at
the, the end of the 18th century. So for
instance, also Haiti became independent and they also adopted
a constitution and a parliament, so they really uh
became the first American, uh, uh, Latin American nation
state. Um. Um, BUT it was also, paradoxically, it
was also attractive to all kinds of traditional rulers,
but because the nation state proved to be very
effective in raising more taxes and also partly because
of the introduction of military service, so the citizens
should serve in the national army, uh, armies became
Much more, much stronger. So traditional rulers, if they
wanted to protect themselves against Western imperialism or to
expand their realms, uh, the cost of their neighbors,
um, they were more or less forced to, um,
to transform their first, their military, so adopt conscription
and uh acquire modern weaponry. But in order to
pay for that, they had to raise more taxes
and um so they generally abolished all kinds of
privileges, uh, feudal rights, um. In order to have
all inhabitants pay the same amount of taxes and
therefore they also introduce legal equality. And in the
end, as a as a capstone to a large
process, they generally also offered some form of political
participation. So what you see is that the Ottoman
Empire, Imperial Japan, even China, but also a country
in Africa like Ethiopia, they slowly adopted the nation-state
model in order to, to survive in the, in
the global arena.
Mm. So, uh, earlier you mentioned how the, I
mean, the first few nation states, at least over
time adopted the constitution, a form of representative government,
and then in the book you go step. By
step through the other elements and institutions that over
time have become inextricably linked with the nation state
model, uh, tell us about national citizenship. How did
it develop over time and who were the people
that got included in the process?
Yeah, interestingly, in, in the French Revolution, um, um,
active citizenship was actually quite broad, so, um, um,
most males could vote, so women were excluded, so
it, it took almost, well, more than a century
for women to, to gain the vote, but almost
all men could vote, but voting was done at
3 different stages, so. First at, at the village
level, then at the uh uh the, the level
of the um uh of, of the, of a
small region and then uh at the level of
the department and um on voting was done on
all kinds of uh local issues, so voting took
a lot of time. So on the local level,
many ordinary people participated, but then they elected their
representative to the departmental level and their um Deliberations
often took about a week, so ordinary people could
not afford to go away for one week without
having, getting any pay. Uh, SO it were, um,
uh, uh, the well-to do who were able to
participate in uh these uh regional uh or these
departmental uh assemblies where then the, uh, the national
representatives. WERE elected, so it effectively excluded the lower
classes from really becoming active at the provincial and
the national level, but after the French Revolution, what
was introduced was sensory suffrage, so only people who
paid a certain amount of taxes were allowed to
vote. And so effectively the, the poorer people were
excluded, um, but not only women and the poor
were excluded, but in general also uncivilized people were
excluded. So this, this becomes particularly clear in the
Americas where um Not, not just uh enslaved people
were excluded um because they were not seen as
as citizens, but also indigenous population were largely excluded
as they were also seen as not rational civilized
people, so they did not receive full citizenship in
the United States, for instance, until the 1920s, uh,
yeah, the 1920s, so more than Uh, Almost 150
years after receiving independence. Um, SO there were, uh,
this process of, of emancipation, um. Uh, TOOK quite
long in the United States, you also have all
these discriminatory rules after the Civil War against participation
of, of black, uh, people in, in voting, and
this only ended in the 1960s with the civil
rights movement. So, so you see all kinds of
emancipatory movements of which, uh, female emancipation is, is,
uh, probably the most, most important.
Right. And how does the nationalist identity develop among
a people? Because I mean, uh, a nation state
is created where it didn't exist one before, uh,
so the same people who live there have to
sort of make that transition to an to an
identity they didn't have before. So how does that
occur?
Yeah, well, well, interestingly, uh, identity and language and
culture was not very relevant at, at the very
start. So during the age of revolutions, France, for
instance, uh, expanded, included parts of Germany, uh, the
Low Countries, Catalonia, Italy, and all these people, whatever
their linguistic or religious background was, became French citizens.
So, so culture and language was not an issue.
It only became an issue during the Romantic era,
so the early 19th century when, uh, uh, especially,
uh, German thinkers came with the idea that every
people has its own language, uh, its own culture,
and therefore also its own collective personality or, or
its own soul or identity and um. As such,
they also argued that every people with its own
language and culture do deserve their own state. So
this was a strong motivation after German unification in
the 19th century, also Italian unification. But the thing
is, uh, in the world today, there are still
7000 languages and there are only not even 200
states, so there is a profound mismatch between, um,
potential culturally defined nations and the actual number of
nation states, um, but, but still the idea that
All members of the nation should speak the same
language and have the same culture became very influential
and so you see that especially when suffrage rights
are extended towards the end of the 19th century,
also including the lower classes, um. Uh, STATES start,
um, paying more attention to primary education. And so
in primary education, people learn the national language, they
learn the glorious history of the fatherland, they learn,
the diversity of the national geography. Uh, SO they
really, uh, really there is a process of nation
building or uh Assimilation or one could even argue
nationalist indoctrination through, through the educational system. And so
this also happens um. Uh, uh, ALMOST globally, uh,
a strong, more attention for primary education and so
really educating, um, the, the children to become, uh,
good patriots. And in France, this process is in
a, in a very famous study, this is called,
uh, turning peasants into Frenchmen. Um, BECAUSE in France,
half of the population did not even speak French,
so they, because of this process through education, they,
they were turned into, um, well behaved French speaking
citizens.
Mhm. So you, you mentioned education there. How about
the introduction of things like a centralized bureaucracy, individual
property rights, and legal equality? How did that, uh,
occur over time?
Um, SO this, this was also very important. So
what you see is that, um, Uh, all kinds
of traditional states, but also European, uh, colonies in,
in Asia and later also, uh, in, in Africa,
they start adopting very similar institutions, adopting private property
in order to be able to tax all the,
the farmers. Um, FARMERS need to produce for the
market in order to, to have money to pay
for these taxes. You see the introduction of conscription
everywhere. You see the introduction of modern education systems.
Uh, SO the model of the, the nation state
and, and it, it, uh, It, it, it is
a European model, but it is also adopted by
independent states as I already said. So the best
case is, is Japan which, uh, in the Meiji
Restoration at the end of the 19th century fully
adopts, uh, European institutions, uh, the organization of the
military, of the education, the healthcare system. Everything is
modeled after, um, European examples.
And what kind of nationalist radicalization occurred from 1885
to 1914 and how did it lead to World
War I?
Yeah, well, that, that is a complex phenomenon. Um,
WHAT you see is that in the second half
of the 19th century, there is lowering of trade
barriers, uh, uh, there is more international cooperation, the
opening up also of new markets like the opening
of Japan. Uh, FOR free trade, the opening of,
uh, uh, China, uh, but what you see is
that from the end of the 19th century, and
especially, um, the, um, The, the, the struggle for
the colonization of Africa. Um, IT is not anymore
about opening up uh Africa for free trade, but
it is, and this is decided at the conference
in Berlin in 1885. You can only claim parts
of Africa if you effectively occupy them, and this
means that the scramble for Africa turns into a
scrambling for territories that are for exclusive use. By
the um Uh, by the imperial power, by the
occupying power, and this also leads to, um, more
protectionism, something that we see, uh, today as well,
and, uh, so to growing global rivalries between the
major powers and at the same time you also
see the rise of racist, uh, uh, ideas, uh,
so about racist, racial differences. Um, BUT interestingly, so
we think of this period as the heyday of
nationalism, so and that this, this ended in the
First World War where all these nation states fiercely
clashed and fought a very brutal war, but in
fact all powers, almost all powers that participated in
the First World War also were empires and racial
ideas. Do not really match with national ideas. So
there is the, the white race or some spoke
of the Germanic race or the Latin races, but
races are larger than national boundaries. So it's a,
it's a kind of paradoxical period in which um
the Um, the rise of xenophobic ideas of international
rivalries, of, uh, imperialism, um, this all is on
the rise and leads to a lot of violence,
uh, but at the same time, it is not
a world of equal nation states that, that is
dominant in this period.
And were empires, particularly the European empires, also nationalized?
Yeah, yeah, so, so we tend to think of
empire and nation state as two different entities, but,
uh, until the 1960s, most big European powers also
were nation states, but at the same time they
were empires, um. Uh, AND so what they did
and what we see nowadays as well is that
they mobilized nationalist feelings also in order to defend
their imperial ambitions. So the prestige of your nation
state depended also on having a large amount of,
of colonies. So Germany. And, and Italy after the
First World War, or Germany lost their, their colonies,
uh, the, the, the Nazis really wanted to have
an empire, so they were fiercely nationalist, but they
also decided we need to have um um Lebensha,
we, we need to have an empire. We need
to have Um, living space, especially in Eastern Europe,
in order to be, uh, seen as a, as
a global and, and, uh, a big power.
Mhm. And what was the impact of the First
World War on nation states?
Well, what we see is that at the end
of the First World War, some of the empires
Disappears. So the Austrian-Hungary Empire disappears, uh, the Tsarist
Empire disappears, and also the Ottoman Empire disappears. And
what we get instead are new nation states, uh,
in most cases, and um this is also very
much helped by Wilson who proclaimed the right to
self-determination. But interestingly, the idea of self-determination also um
uh resonated in the rest of the world. So
Egyptian nationalists, Syrian nationalist, nationalists from Korea, from China,
they also appealed to the right to self-determination to
become independent or in the case of China to
To get rid of the, the uh uh foreign
occupied territories. Um, BUT Wilson did not mean self-determination
for the rest of the world and, and England
and France with their huge empires were not very
inclined to give up their empires either. So the,
the right to self-determination. Was only applied to civilized
European nations in a sense.
Mhm. And what happened when it comes to nationalization
between the two world wars and what was then
the impact of World War II on nation states?
Um, YEAH, so, during the Second World, uh, or,
or during the, the interwar period, we see first
a period of, of stabilization of international cooperation, but
then quickly after, especially after 1929, we see the
rise of fascist movements and, and the fascists come
to power first in Italy early 1922 and then
in, in Germany as well, and so we see
tensions on the rise again. Um, Um And, and
what happens is that they and also um Imperial
Japan, uh, their policies are explicitly racist, so, um,
the European colonial powers also uh were quite racist
and so were the United States, but it was
not part of their official rhetoric and in Nazi
Germany, uh, this really was the case, uh. And,
and also Imperial Japan was uh really saw itself
as superior to the, to the other uh uh
Asian territories that it liberated from, from the West.
Um SO what you see after 95, 45 is
a kind of backlash. So open racism becomes kind
of taboo. Uh, European powers also understand that they
will have to treat the population of their colonies,
uh, in a more equal way, so they start
kind of transforming their imperial, uh, uh, realms into
a more egalitarian, um, Commonwealth, the British Commonwealth, for
instance, or France tries to, to turn the empire
in the French union. Uh, IN which all territories
more or less have the same status, um, but
one politician in France, uh, Edouard Henriot, a former
prime minister in the debates on the new constitution
of this French Union, he also argued, uh, we
do not want to be ruled by, uh, the
people from the colonies. So even though they Uh,
try to create a more egalitarian empire, it was
also clear that power would remain in the hands
of Paris or London and that at most the
inhabitants of the colonies would be second-rate citizens, and
this is also very clear in all kinds of
social security regulations. They did not apply to, to
the colonies. Um, AND so this was really an
incentive also for the independence, uh, movements. Mhm.
And what happened after 1945, that is after the
Second World War, and up to 1979 with the
more modernization of nation states and the dissolution of
colonial empires?
Yeah, so, so interestingly this has been seen as,
as a period of um Uh, the rise of
independence movements, um, but it was at the same
time also Empires understanding that the position and, and
the situation was not tenable, so they were also
willing to give up their colony. So, so it
was reluctant. It, it happened slowly. It took decades
in most cases and a lot of pressure and
often sometimes a lot of violence in order to
happen, but they did not cling to their empires.
Well, Portugal maybe is a, is a small exception.
Um, uh, BUT, um, Um, this was the, the
general tendency, but interestingly, national identities in this period
were not emphasized. So what was important in this
period was modernization. Um, PROGRESS. So what you see
is, um, for instance, the agricultural revolution happened in
this period, so new, uh, varieties were created of
grain, of corn, of, of rice that had a
much higher, um, um, output and so the, um,
It is the period of the mechanization of the
countryside of also more efficient, larger plots. So what
you see is that the countryside throughout the world
became much more similar and new buildings were mostly
built of concrete, were very so. Traditionally, the countryside
was the part of where uh vernacular culture, where
traditions were cherished, where typical buildings could be found,
and this disappears quite quickly in the, in the
1950s and 1960s, and the same happens in the
cities. Everywhere in the world, you see the same.
STEEL and glass buildings arise, high rise buildings, the
invention of, of air conditioning is is very important
there as well. So there was no need anymore
to, to take into account climatic conditions. One could
build the same buildings everywhere around the world. And
a nice example is, is Brazil, where a new,
a totally new capital, Brasilia was built in the
midst of the jungle and building materials were fled
in with, with airplanes, um, and the streets have
no names, so there are no references to Brazilian
history. It is just uh numbers. And all buildings,
uh, have the same size and the same look,
uh, so it's a very rational, uh, city, uh,
with no particular Brazilian identity except for the name
of the city, um, and so this is what
we see happening everywhere around the world, so it's
a period of, of Independent nation states, so the
nation state really becomes the dominant form of statehood,
uh, but at the same time, national differences, uh,
largely disappeared during this period.
OK. And what was the role played by international
organizations, if any, like the United Nations and the
International Monetary Fund in the process of nation-state formation
during the 20th century?
Yeah, so, interestingly, um, what, what we see is
that, um, Well, all former colonies adopt, uh, the,
the, the template of the nation state, so the
nation now is sovereign, it's a nation of citizens,
so most African countries are very, uh, diverse as
well. Many languages are spoken, um. So it's the,
the, the community of citizens that becomes independent. All
countries need a flag. So if you go to
the United States, to the United Nations, your flag
should be visible outside of the building. You need
an anthem. You need a parliament, elections, a constitution,
and also, um. Uh, ALL kinds of institutions like
the World Health Organizations, the IMF, the World Bank,
they also impose certain standard institutions. So if you
want a loan from the IMF, you are forced
to adopt all kinds of accounting mechanisms from the
IMF. Um, THE World Health Organization defines diseases and
the way these diseases should be treated globally. So,
so what we see is a process of growing,
uh, homogenization through these international organizations.
And tell us about how over time nation states
started to provide more services to wider sections of
their population and many adopted, for example, the model
of the welfare state, as well as the emancipation
of women, indigenous populations, the LGBTQY plus community, and
so on.
Yeah, so, so, um, I think this, there are,
there are two, there are two distinct phases. So
first of all, what you see in the, in
the post-war period is, um, a very strong emphasis
also on the, the welfare state. So, Uh, even
independent African countries try to provide education, uh, healthcare,
uh, assistance to the needy, um, for their population,
and, and it's, it's very difficult because you need
a lot of, uh, of money for that, um.
Um, BUT it's, it's a global process. You also
see it in the communist world where the, the
welfare state is even more important and also in
many African countries where this is mostly also organized
in a slightly different way through enterprises and, and,
uh, neighborhoods uh or. Organizations, um, but this is
a tendency you see very strongly in the 1950s
and 1960s and early 1970s, but then the, the,
the 1970s really are, are a turning point. So
what we see is the oil crisis is very
important and um Both in the capitalist world and
in the communist world, it is the regime struggle
to find an answer. So we have in most
countries uh higher debts, um, uh, inflation, uh, growing,
um, uh, unemployment, scarcity in uh, in the communist
countries, so people line up for the shops, um,
so. And in the Western world, It is neoliberalism
that is the kind of answer, uh, so what
you see is that the welfare state is, uh,
well. The, it, it is diminished, uh, so it
becomes less important and many parts were also, uh,
suffer severe budget cuts, um, but what happens is
that, um, markets are opened up, um, it is
not the government who should decide what happens, but
it is markets and market forces, um. But together
with the, the rise of neoliberalism and, and especially
it's the, the election of Margaret Thatcher in 1979,
of Ronald Reagan in 1980, that, that really is
a kind of turning point here, um, but at
the same time you see also the rise of
identity politics, so In the 1950s and 196960s, social
movements focused on the welfare state, so on more
social security, on higher wages, but you see that
many indigenous communities, um, but also the LGBTB community,
um, uh, they start focusing on rights, on human
rights, and also respect for their own culture. Um,
AND this is what you see in the Americas
with, uh, um, the, the civil rights movement is
a very strong incentive here, but it is also
taken up by a lot of indigenous communities in
North America, but also in South America. Um, THE
Aboriginals in Australia, for instance, start a kind of
emancipation process, um, but you also see a kind
of return of religion. So religion. Uh, AND it's
basically also majority populations that play for a bigger
role of their religion in the specific policies of
their country and, and another turning point here is
the Iranian Revolution of 1979, so the same. YEAR
is a turning point also for neoliberalism. This is
also the breakthrough moment one could argue for, for
um um religious identity politics, and 1979 is also
the year when in the United States. The evangelicals,
uh, uh mobilize and really try to put their
agenda of, uh, um, um, uh, patriotism, uh, against,
uh, abortion, um, and, uh. And, and more attention
for family uh uh traditional family norms, uh, they
put it on the political agenda as well. So
you see, uh, the rise of, of identity politics,
both of minorities and of majorities uh starting already
in the, in the late 1970s.
So let me ask you now about the influence
of nationalism on culture and several different kinds of
cultural practices and also how those cultural practices have
contributed to helping fashion a sort of. World of
discrimination. So how does nationalism influence the arts and
the humanities mapping, uh, its dissemination through, uh, media
like newspapers, television, and social media?
Um, SO a lot of questions. Um, SO maybe
let's start with, with the sciences. So from the,
uh, early 19th century onwards in the Romantic era,
so the idea is that each people has its
own personality and so in order to understand this
personality, you have to understand its Evolution. So, the
romantic era also is the, the, the era, the
rise and professionalization of the science of history, the
study of history becomes very important and history writing
from this moment onward is basically national history writing.
So the nation or the nation state becomes the
main unit. To study the past and uh this
also happens to art history, literary history. So what
these scholars do is really define the culture of
the nation, how it evolved over time and what
is its most characteristics and glorious uh uh aspects.
So the sciences, the humanities become very national, but
the same is also true of, uh, the social
sciences, so. Economy is the study of either domestic
economy or international economy. Politics is the study of
international relations between nation states or domestic politics. In
statistics, Numbers, statistics are gathered on a national level.
So the nation state again is the basic unit
for comparative studies or for studying developments of the
population of the health of the population. Um, SO
the, the nation state really becomes the, the, the
main unit for, um, both the humanities and the
social sciences and even hard sciences like, uh, like
statistics. And then, um, what you also have is
the construction of national culture. So painters start to
paint, uh, history, uh, paintings uh with, with national
heroes or typical landscapes, uh, scientists go out to,
to write down, uh, folkloric stories. Um, YOU have,
um, when Particular landscapes are protected, which starts in
the United States. It is not called uh uh
a natural park, but it's called a national park.
So, typical landscapes are in a way nationalized, become
part of a national patrimony, and what I found
very interesting also is the nationalization of food practices.
So, In the 19th century, uh, the poor, they,
they just ate what they could get, so very
simple. There are no recipes needed. Um, AND the
rich generally tended to adopt, uh, the culinary standards
of, uh, high society which in Europe was and,
and many, many parts of the Western world was,
uh, the, the French, uh, uh, culinary traditions, the
high cuisine, which originated in the, the culinary traditions
of the French court. And the same happened in
um the Ottoman Empire and in China, for instance,
there, the, the court also set the standards for
um uh for culinary traditions, but what happens at
the end of the 19th century is that Um,
all kinds of authors start writing national cookbooks, so
French, um, cuisine, Italian cuisine, Spanish, uh, Portuguese, uh,
uh, Mexican cuisine. And they write it primarily for
housewives. So it is the traditional cuisine for ordinary
people. So it's basically for the middle classes. These
are the people who can afford to buy a
cookbook, who can afford sufficient food in order to
have real recipes and diversified meals. So what you
see really is A nationalization of food practices and
we now see it also in restaurants. So everywhere
in the world, you can go to a Chinese,
Mexican, Italian restaurant. Um, SO ethnic foods, as we
call it, it, it, it's a misnomer because it
is national food, uh, really have become dominant around,
uh, around the globe.
Mhm. So you mentioned lots of different uh cultural
practices there. What about sports and tourism? I mean,
in sports, particularly with events like the Olympic Games,
in what ways do you think that might contribute
to, uh, fashioning the world of discrete nations?
Yeah, so I think sports is, is extremely important,
and, but the interesting thing of sports also is
that it's, it is, um, uh, we say it
is national teams, but these nations are only um
the nation states, the member, member states of the
IOC. So if you are a nation without a
state like Catalonia or the Kurds or the Flemish.
You cannot participate in the Olympic Games or in
World Cup football. Um, YOU need to have a
state that becomes a member of, uh, of the
IOC and is recognized on the international stage. Um,
AND then, so, uh, what we see also is
that people tend to rally behind their national team,
especially or sportsmen, especially if they are very successful.
Um, AND what happens is that, uh, all kinds
of minorities in general also rally behind, uh, the
flag. So in Cameroon, for instance, the, the football
team is very successful in, in the Africa Cup,
for instance, but also at World Cups. And so
Cameroon has over 200 languages and different ethnic groups,
but when the national team plays, everybody is watching
the game, and, and so there is a kind
of national conversation. People rally behind their team. And
in Europe, what we also see is that um
the multicultural. The nation that has become a reality
in most parts of, uh, of the world is
really visible, uh, best visible on, on the pitch.
So, uh, the French national team consists of people
with, with, uh, all kinds of backgrounds from, uh,
different parts of French African colonies from, uh, uh,
but also from mireb immigrants, um. Uh, FROM a
Basque background, all play for the French national team
and, and so it is really the nation as
the community of citizens that is really visible, uh,
visible there, but there are also cases. Uh, HARDCORE
Catalan nationalist one chair for the Spanish national team,
for instance, uh,
mhm, yeah, uh, tell us about the exceptions to
the nation state model like the absolute monarchies of
Saudi Arabia and Brunei or religiously defined states such
as the Vatican City and the Islamic Emirate of
Afghanistan.
Yeah, so, so, um, uh, what one could argue
is that, that the model of the nation-state really
since the 1960s has become dominant. So almost all,
uh, states that became independent adopted the nation-state model
and this very contrary to the, the, uh, the,
the ethnic or cultural model. So there are thousands
of Uh, ethnic or linguistic communities that do not
have their own state, uh, so this is not
a reality. What is a reality is the adoption
of the nation-state model, so the nation as citizens.
Um, SO there are, there are only 4 exceptions
in the world right now, and which, which is
really, uh, incredible because the nation-state model only was
invented 200. 50 years ago. So for, for a
historian like, like I am, this is a very
short period in the thousands of years of human
history. We have empires for probably 10,000 years. We
have kingdoms, we have tribal configurations. We have city-states.
They, they exist for already thousands of years. But
the nation state only appeared at a very late
stage in human history, but really now has become
the dominant form of statehood. And so what you
see in Saudi Arabia is already women have received
more equal rights over the last few years. There
is a kind of consultative assembly, so they're slowly
moving towards the nation state model as well, and
I think if you would really ask. Have uh
free elections in Afghanistan, then the people would, would
prefer, uh, um, a, a constitutional system to, to
their emirate, uh, probably.
Yeah, and earlier you when we were talking about
sports, you mentioned that uh there are nations like
the Kurds and the Catalans that do not have
their own state and so they are not recognized
as such. What do you make of them?
Um, YEAH, well, the, the, the, the idea of,
um, A people with its own language, with its
own culture, and therefore deserving to have its own
state is still very much alive. And if you
look at Catalonia and the Kurds, for instance, there
are a considerable group of people. The Catalans, Catalonia,
if it would become independent, would be a middle
sized European country, similar also in wealth and population
numbers like Finland or Austria, which are well recognized
members of the European Union. So because they are
not independent, they also do not have a seat
in the European Union nor in the United Nations.
So it's also a kind of frustration for them.
But on the other hand, it is also quite
paradoxical because a lot of Catalan speakers uh live
outside of Catalonia, so the region of Valencia, for
instance, uh, they speak a similar language with they
probably define themselves as Valencian, but one could argue
it's a, it's a form of Catalan, um. The
Balearic Islands, uh, even in the south of France
are, are Catalans, but it's not the, the Catalan
people that demands independence. It was the region of
the autonomous region of Catalonia that demanded independence, and
there half of the population has Spanish as its
first language, and moreover, almost all people in Catalonia
are bilingual. Um, SO, so the. And in the
case of the Kurds, um, it, it was the
Kurdish region of within Iraq, an autonomous region within
Iraq that had organized a referendum in 2017, and
it were not the Kurds in Turkey or Syria
or Or Iran that, that could participate. So here
we also see that, that you need uh a
kind of state or a provincial authorities in order
to make yourself uh heard at the international stage
and even then it's complicated because nobody recognized these
independence uh uh referenda.
So let's talk now a little bit about nationalism
and its impact on current politics. So um how
do you look at the current state of nationalism
and in what ways does the rise of nationalism
manifest itself worldwide?
Yeah, so I think this is, this is uh
very interesting because we all see that nationalism really
is on the rise, especially among, uh, populist, right-wing,
right-wing populists, um, and, and it's very exclusive culturally,
uh, um. Uh, COLORED nationalism, so, so against foreigners,
immigrants, um, emphasizing all kinds of cultural, uh, traditions,
um, and I think what we see is on
the one hand, the rise of neoliberalism which has
really been the dominant ideology since the 1980s. This
meant that, that many issues, um, economic issues. Disappeared
from political debate because they were argued this is
up to the markets, so there are not many
political debates on the gap between rich and poor
or raising pensions or Um, so these debates which
were dominant in the 1950s and 1960s have become,
uh, have, have largely disappeared from the political arena.
And on the other hand, what has become much
more important are identity issues. And so, um, uh,
identity of the majority but also identity of all
kinds of, uh, minorities. So identity politics really has
become center stage in, in the political arena, in
most parliaments, in most elections as well, um, and
this has been strongly encouraged also by, uh, commercial
media and especially the, um, Internet and social media.
So the social media uh enterprises like Facebook, uh,
uh, YouTube, uh, uh, Instagram, they want people to
spend as much time as possible on their platforms
and so what they do is their algorithms, they
stimulate, um, Emotions, extreme opinions, extreme footage, so the
stranger, the more outrageous the images or opinions are,
the more they are stimulated on the social media
and also on Um, commercial television stations in, in
general, uh, and so what we see is a,
is a very strong polarization, um, based largely on
identity issues, um, and, and this very strongly this
weakens centrist political parties and encourages, uh, very much
political parties that focus on these identities issues, especially,
uh, uh, uh, right-wing populists. Which came to power
in Brazil with Bolsonaro, uh, uh, in, in Hungary
with Orban, uh, in, in India with, uh, uh,
Modi, and now, uh, uh, Trump in the United
States is, is probably the, the best example. Um,
SO, so we see a very, uh, different, um,
different environment, uh, nowadays, and, and, yeah, it's kind
of worrying now, I would say.
And in the countries where there's been a rise
of that kind of far right nationalist rhetoric, there's
also been xenophobic incidents, right? I mean, and that's
also a manifestation of nationalism taken to the extreme,
correct. Yeah, yeah, that, that, that's certainly the case
and uh um so, so right wing violence and,
and, but, but also as we have seen in,
in the United States, uh, there are also some.
Uh, ISOLATED figures that, that take up their, their
guns and, and try to kill right wing influencers,
for instance. Uh, SO, so, uh, the atmosphere gets
heated up and, and, um, yeah, this is not
a very pleasant world anymore, um, and then the
future does not look very bright, I would say.
And so finally, I mean, still on the same
topic, but this will be my final question. Uh,
WHAT do you think about the recent guarding of
national borders that in certain countries has been strengthened,
especially against the entry of poor immigrants?
Yeah, so, so what we see is that, that
the xenophobic rhetoric is very much against poor immigrants,
so expats and, and, um, um, rich people that
buy a second home, for instance, are, are often
still welcomed. But it's especially poor immigrants and, and
they're associated, especially if they have different skin color
of a different religion. So in Europe, it's, it's
mostly anti-Muslim as well or anti-African, anti-black. In the
United States, it's, it's mostly against the Hispanics, um.
And so, um, this is what you see, so,
so a kind of hostile, xenophobic reaction also from,
from governments, uh, but the interesting thing is that
we also see a kind of uh resurgence of
imperial tendencies. So, um, Putin is extremely nationalist, but
he also tries to, uh, conquer, um, uh, Ukraine.
Um, Xi Jinping in China is also extremely nationalist,
uh, but he also tries to create new islands
in the South Chinese Sea, uh, and annexing territorial
waters to the detriment of, of neighboring countries like
Vietnam, the Philippines, and even Indonesia. So they're expanding,
uh, uh, in the ocean. Uh, AND Trump, uh,
is extremely nationalist, but he also claims the Panama
Canal. He, he wants, Greenland, uh, he wants to
add Canada to the United States even though a
large part of the Canadians have French as their,
uh, uh, national language, uh, so. So language and
culture do not seem to matter. It, it is
also um creating kind of new, new imperial states,
um, where it's not. An international order existing of
equal nation states that Where, where there still are
power differences, but at least in the United Nations,
in the General Assembly, every country has one vote,
and it is the international order supposedly consists of
equal partners that collaborate. To decide on the future
of the world, but what we see lately is,
uh, the law of the jungle, uh, might is
right. The big powers, um, they take what they
can get, or they impose their will, uh, what
we see very clearly in the case of Trump
and his tariff war, they impose their, their tariffs.
Quite arbitrarily on, on countries around the world and
small countries, for instance, in um in Europe, um.
Switzerland got a tariff of I think 38%, uh,
so the European Union, many countries complain that we
now have a tariff of 15%, but Switzerland is
alone and, and it's a, it's a puppet in
the hands of Trump and, and so they have
no negotiation power. So what we, what we see
here very much is that the strong can, can
impose their will on, on the weak. So we
see a kind of new uh uh resurgence of
imperial tendencies in, in a slightly different way and,
and so geopolitics is, is, uh, is changing very
fast. And the interesting thing is that many nationalist
movements in Europe wanted to leave the European Union,
but now they understand we need Europe to protect
us against Trump in a sense.
Right, and do you look at this as a
worrying trend and something that could even get worse
in the future?
Yeah, so, so, um. I, I think the major
threat to humanity nowadays is, is climate change and
um for that we should cooperate harmoniously together as
citizens of the world, um, but if imperialism is
on the rise and, and in the case of
Trump, there is no, he even ignores climate change
and, and stimulates the oil industry and, and. And
stops uh uh wind energy projects, so that is
not very helpful and, and international collaboration uh does
not really come off the ground this way.
Mhm. OK, so let's wrap up the interview here
then, Doctor Storm. The book is again Nationalism A
World History, and of course leaving a link to
it in the description of the interview. And would
you like to tell people where they can find
you and your work on the internet?
Yeah, so, uh, uh, I have a personal website
on the, uh, from my university, so, uh, and,
and I have a lot of my publications also
on the, on the web, so, uh, uh, but
the book, the book should be available. There's a
Spanish translation, uh, already, and there will be translations
into Romanian and Bulgarian as well, uh, so probably,
uh, we, hopefully we get more translations as well.
Yeah, and I recommend it to everyone. I mean,
it was a great read for me, so thank
you so much for coming on the show and
for writing the book. It was a fascinating conversation.
OK, thank you very much.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forst Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognun, Machael Jonathan Labran, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltonin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel Pancortezus Suliliski,
Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith, and Wiseman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianno, Luke Lovai, Georgiuss
Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams, Di Acosta,
Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli
Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Jr. Old Eringbon.
Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff
McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel, Thomas Dovner,
Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica
Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Ekoriati,
Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler, Alexander Obert,
Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner,
Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean Nelson, Mike
Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks to my
producers is are Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink, Tom
Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, John Carlamon, Negro, Al Nick Cortiz
and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers, Matthew
Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank you
for all.